Arttu Kilpinen
014013070

Revised Design Document


Introduction:
In the course Networked Services And Systems the studends were assigned to design and implement a
realtime multiplayer game. This document specifies the implemented game. Although the design
documentation could be used as an implementation documentation this file concentrates more
usage and implementation details and revises the few differences between the plan and the
implementation.

There were two alternative solutions in the design documentation. The first suggested variant
was called the reliable solution. In that design the system did not allow any data loss and
every packet delivered reliably with use of timers, retransmissions and acknowledgements.
Since this solution would yelt decreased latency and increased burden in the network traffic
(not to mention the more complex implementation) the second solution -- the unreliable solution --
was chosen. The unreliable variant allows packet loss and it is possible that client's and server's
states differs as explained in the design documentation. This problem is resolved by periodically
sending the state from the server to all clients.

Differences:
There were only minor differences between the design documentation and the implementation.
All of the differences were about the data representation. The networking functionality
is mostly implemented as designed.

1. The state query:
In the design documentation it was defined that the client gets the state
of the game before it can join to it. The state query was documented to use TCP control
connection. In the implementation this query is handled with the UDP game play connection.
It is assumed to be delivered correctly and no reliability is guaranteed. This is the weakest
spot of the game since if the query message or the response is lost the game in the client hangs
and the server continues to keep track of that user (so there seem to be idle player in the game)

2. The list command response length:
All read operations from sockets (except the gameplay controls
from clients to the server) tries to read 1KiB of data at once. The design documentation specified that
there must be a maximum length specified for the resource list response (specified by the
files variable in the server.py). This length is in practice 1KiB but it is not explicitly
specified in the server. If the files variable is longer than 1KiB the client does not know
all of the needed files. For the same reason every message from the servers game play socket
can not exceed this length. As the control sequences forwarded by the server is guaranteed
to be smaller the only possible message that could break the system is the state message.
It depends from the amount of users and may grow arbitrarily. Each user in the game augments
the state message by 41 bytes so at most 24 users are supported with this message size.
However the message size can be easily increased if needed (the game was tested with at most
10 players)

3. The needed transmission rates:
The design document's section 5.3 analyzed the needed transmission rates. Those calculations did
not take into account that the game state needs to use some kind of identification of the users.
The design document assumed that the one byte long control messages from users can be forwarded
as they are. The id could be encoded to single integer values. In that case only 2 extra payload
bytes could be enough. However the implementation uses the string encoded user IP address and port
numbers. That way the payload from a single packet forward grows from 1 byte to maximum of 30
bytes (depending the users IP address and port) and to total packet size grows from 47 bytes
to 76 bytes. The calculations presented is still useful since the magnitude of the transmission
capacity is anyway dependent from the amount of the users in the same way.

4. Control connection:
The control connection is kept alive while the user is playng. This was specified to be closed
in the design documentation.

Implementation details:
The client implementation is quite simple. There is a main execution thread which initializes
the control connection, takes care of the file transfers and handles the sending part of the
game play connection. The clien executes the TCP connections first and after the player is
ready to join the game enters and infinite loop where it reads and sends the commands
from the user. Before entering that loop it launches the listening thread which listens the
server and modifies the game state accordingly. Both of the threads manipulates the state of
the game. The main thread modifies the state when the user gives an input and the listening
thread affects when it receives data from the server. Both threads prints the game state when
it changes. Additional information of the data received / sent to / from the network is printed
to the standard error. The game state is printed to the standard output. 

The server uses more threads. First of all there is a thread for every control connection.
In those control connections the server is capable of listing the needed files, starting
a file transmission threads and launching the game play treads. When the user requests a file
in its control connection, the server creates a new thread with a new socket where the file
can be downloaded from and sends the information of this socket to the client. When the client
joins to the game play a new thread is also launched. This thread handles the game play
communication with the client. In addition for every game play connection there is a timer thread
that handles the full state transmission to associated user.


Usage:
The server does not take any input from the local environment neither in runtime nor via
command line parameters. The server is simply started and no more actions is needed. However,
there are few parameters in the server.py file that may be changed:
1. the STATE_SEND_INTERVAL variable defines the interval for state transmissions to the
users. This is currently set to three seconds. The reliability increases when the state
send interval decreases. however with many players the state transfer becomes very expensive
operation.
2. The variable named "files" defines the needed files for the game that user must have.
It is null character delimited list of filenames. Currently there is map.py which is the map
and textures123 which is 4MiB file filled with random data. This file is of course not needed
but it is there for testing purposes. The files must be in the same directory as the server.py

The client has more commands. When the client starts it automatically connects to the server and
enters the loop where it reads the input from the user. Possible commands after the execution are
"list", "join" and "quit". The commands needs to be entered exactly as before. Those commands
are sent to the server and if the command is not recognized by the server it echoes the command
with an error message. The list command gets the list of the needed files and automatically
downloads the files with "gett" command. (so the gett command is understood by the server
but it is executed implicitly in the client software. The join quit command simply exits the
client. The join command enters the user in the game and stats printing the state of the game.
If the user has not fetched the needed files the behavior is undefined. Make sure to run the list
command before the join! (If the user already have the needed files for example from previous
session this is not needed). When the user enters to the game the client software prints its
state and waits for input. Possible inputs in the game play are "d", "u", "l", "r" and "f".
Those commands moves the user (f)orward, turns the user (u)p, (d)own, (l)eft or (r)ight.
The additional information of the client is printed to stderr.

In addition there are few variables in the client.py file which can be modified:
1. HOST variable defines the servers IP address or hostname
2. PORT variable defines the servers port (defaults to 3333. Same with the server)
3. MESSAGE_SIZE defines the maximum message size that is read at a time. As mentioned earlier
this variable needs to have a bigger value if there are more (than 24) players in the game
or if the needed files list sent by server is longer than MESSAGE_SIZE


NOTES:
1. There is no safe exit functionality. If the user turns the client down (for example by
pressing ctrl + c the server gets no information and the user stays in the gameplay as
an idle player.
2. The printState function uses triangle (e.g. ▸) characters to indicate the direction of the
user. In order to see these characters the users font must support them. The characters used
are defined in UNICODE's first level. However not all system font configurations (e.g. executing from
external host via putty) support these.
